# Using machine learning to understand causal relationships between urban form and travel CO2 emissions across continents

This is the code for the manuscript titled "Using machine learning to understand causal relationships between urban form and travel CO2 emissions across continents", submitted to PNAS on 6th Dec 2023. Until its publication we intend to add several notebooks supporting our analysis and showcasing how to download, preprocess and analyze the data we used. 


## Abstract   
Climate change mitigation in urban mobility requires policies reconfiguring urban form to increase accessibility and facilitate low-carbon modes of transport. However, current policy research has insufficiently assessed urban form effects on car travel at three levels: (1) Causality – Can causality be established beyond theoretical and correlation-based analyses? (2) Generalizability – Do relationships hold across different cities and world regions? (3) Context specificity – How do relationships vary across neighborhoods of a city? Here, we address all three gaps via causal graph discovery and explainable machine learning to detect urban form effects on intra-city car travel, based on mobility data of six cities across three continents. We find significant causal effects of urban form on trip emissions and inter-feature effects, which had been neglected in previous work. Our results demonstrate that destination accessibility matters most overall, while low density and low connectivity also sharply increase CO2 emissions. These general trends are similar across cities but we find idiosyncratic effects that can lead to substantially different recommendations. In more monocentric cities, we identify spatial corridors – about 10–50 km from the city center – where subcenter-oriented development is more relevant than increased access to the main center. Our work demonstrates a novel application of machine learning that enables new research addressing the needs of causality, generalizability, and contextual specificity for scaling evidence-based urban climate solutions
